korte samenvatting van elke methode en voor-en nadelen

Accurate: The system should provide a reasonable
estimate of pose with a mean absolute error of 5
or less.
Monocular: The system should be able to estimate
head pose from a single camera. Although accuracy
might be improved by stereo or multiview imagery,
this should not be a requirement for the system to
operate.
Autonomous: There should be no expectation of
manual initialization, detection, or localization,
precluding the use of pure-tracking approaches
that measure the relative head pose with respect to
some initial configuration and shape/geometric
approaches that assume facial feature locations
are already known.


------------------------------------------------------
Appearance template methods compare a new image 
of a head to a set of exemplars (each labeled with a 
discrete pose) in order to find the most similar view. 
+ (can be) easy, works for high and low resolution data, data is already labeled
- accuracy (faulty assumption of pairwise similiarity)?
	(<-> techniques to reduce variance in facial features,
	but still this might be fixing in a fundamentally wrong approach
	(humans don't need no experience in head pose..?))
- discrete approach: for each pose a set of training examples
		-> for a rather continuous pose there must be many sets
			-> computationally expensive




Detector array methods train a series of head 
detectors each attuned to a specific pose and assign 
a discrete pose to the detector with the greatest
support.
+ works with high and low resolution
+ can learn to ignore appearance variation that does not correspond to pose change
+  separate head detection and localization step is not
required, since each detector is also capable of making the
distinction between head and nonhead. ->  the 2 are combined -> less chance to make an error
(+/- each detector can make the distictio between head and nonhead -> we'll only get heads so it is not necessary?)
- discrete nature of this approach: limited set of pose detectors <-> "continuous" pose
									many is again computationally difficult					We need quite some accuracy!
- training (many + and - examples for each detector) -> we do not have MANY examples

+ Simultaneous
detection and pose estimation can be performed by
applying the detector to many subregions in the image.

+ Another improvement is that unlike appearance templates,
detector arrays employ training algorithms that learn to
ignore the appearance variation that does not correspond to
pose change. Detector arrays are also well suited for high
and low-resolution images.


- It is burdensome to train many detectors for each discrete pose.
For a detector array to function as a head detector and pose
estimator, it must also be trained on many negative nonface
examples, which require substantially more training data.
In addition, there may be systematic problems that arise as
the number of detectors is increased. If two detectors are
attuned to very similar poses, the images that are positive
training examples for one must be negative training
examples for another. It is not clear whether prominent
detection approaches can learn a successful model when the
positive and negative examples are very similar in appear-
ance. Indeed, in practice, these systems have been limited to
one DOF and fewer than 12 detectors. Furthermore, since
the majority of the detectors have binary outputs, there is no
way to derive a reliable continuous estimate from the result,
allowing only coarse head pose estimates and creating
ambiguities when multiple detectors simultaneously classi-
fy a positive image. Finally, the computational requirements
increase linearly with the number of detectors, making it
difficult to implement a real-time system with a large array.

- not tested on gaze and yaw change






Nonlinear regression methods use nonlinear regres-
sion tools to develop a functional mapping from the
image or feature data to a head pose measurement.

-The caveat with these approaches is that it is not
clear how well a specific regression tool will be able to learn
the proper mapping.


+Success has been
demonstrated using Support Vector Regressors (SVRs) if
the dimensionality of the data can be reduced, as for
example with principal component analysis (PCA) [64],
[65], or with localized gradient orientation histograms [86]
—the latter giving better accuracy for head pose estimation.
Alternatively, if the location of facial features are known in
advance, regression tools can be used on relatively low-
dimensional feature data extracted at these points [70], [78].

+ Neural networks are very fast, only require
cropped labeled faces for training, work well in near-field
and far-field imagery, and give some of the most accurate
head pose estimates in practice

- prone to  error from poor head localization
- difficult??





Manifold embedding methods seek low-dimen-
sional manifolds that model the continuous variation
in head pose. New images can be embedded into
these manifolds and then used for embedded
template matching or regression.

+- Two of the most popular dimensionality reduction
techniques, PCA and its nonlinear kernelized version,
KPCA, discover the primary modes of variation from a
set of data samples. inferior head estimation but...
+ To mitigate these problems, the appearance information
can be decoupled from the pose by splitting the training
data into groups that each share the same discrete head
pose. Then, PCA and KPCA can be applied to generate a
separate projection matrix for each group. These pose-
specific eigenspaces, or pose-eigenspaces, each represent the
primary modes of appearance variation and provide a
decomposition that is independent of the pose variation.
Head pose can be estimated by normalizing the image and
projecting it into each of the pose-eigenspaces, thus finding
the pose with the highest projection energy [114]. Alter-
natively, the embedded samples can be used as the input to
a set of classifiers, such as multiclass SVMs [63]. As
testament to the limitations of KPCA, however, it has been
shown that, by skipping the KPCA projection altogether
and using local Gabor binary patterns, one can greatly
improve pose estimation with a set of multiclass SVMs [69].
Pose-eigenspaces have an unfortunate side effect. The
ability to estimate fine head pose is lost since, like detector
arrays, the estimate is derived from a discrete set of
measurements. If only coarse head pose estimation is
desired, it is better to use multiclass linear discriminant
analysis (LDA) or the kernelized version, KLDA [23], since
these techniques can be used to find the modes of variation
in the data that best account for the differences between
discrete pose classes [15], [136].

Other manifold embedding approaches have shown
more promise for head pose estimation. These include
Isometric feature mapping (Isomap) [101], [119], Locally
Linear Embedding (LLE) [102], and Laplacian Eigenmaps
(LE) [6]. To estimate head pose with any of these
techniques, there must be a procedure to embed a new
data sample into an existing manifold. Raytchev et al. [101]
described such a procedure for an Isomap manifold, but, for
out-of-sample embedding in an LLE and LE manifold, there
has been no explicit solution. For these approaches, a new
sample must be embedded with an approximate technique,
such as a Generalized Regression Neural Network [4].



-seems a lot of work

- rigid model of head might be unrealistic.


Flexible models fit a nonrigid model to the facial
structure of each individual in the image plane. Head
pose is estimated from feature-level comparisons or
from the instantiation of the model parameters.

+- In addition to pose
labels, these methods require training data with annotated
facial features, but it enables them to make comparisons at ---> do we have this annotation already?

+- Now,
consider a template based on a deformable graph of local
feature points (eye corners, nose, mouth corners, etc.). To
train this system, facial feature locations are manually
labeled in each training image, and local feature descriptors
such as Gabor jets can be extracted at each location. These
features can be extracted from views of multiple people,
and extra invariance can be achieved by storing a bunch of
descriptors at each node. This representation has been
called an Elastic Bunch Graph   --> seems interesting and flexible but...
Elastic Graph Matching
(EGM). For head pose estimation, a different bunch graph is
created for every discrete pose, and each of these is
compared to a new view of the head. The bunch graph
with the maximum similarity assigns a discrete pose to the
head [55], [136]. Because EGM uses features located at
specific facial points, there is significantly less intersubject
variability than with unaligned points. This makes it much
more likely that similarity between the models will equate
to similarity in pose. A disadvantage to this method is that
the pose estimate is discrete, requiring many bunch graphs
to gain fine head pose estimates. Unfortunately, comparing
many bunch graphs, each with many deformations, is
computationally expensive in comparison to most other
head pose estimation techniques.



Another flexible model that has evolved for head pose
estimation is the Active Appearance Model (AAM) [19],
which learns the primary modes of variation in facial
shape and texture from a 2D perspective. Consider a set
of M specific facial points, (perhaps the corners of the

- In practice, these approaches are limited to head
pose orientations from which the outer corners of both eyes
are visible. It is also not evident that AAM fitting algorithms
could successfully operate for far-field head pose estimation
with low-resolution facial images. <- niet echt relevant nadeel voor ons










Geometric methods use the location of features such
as the eyes, mouth, and nose tip to determine pose
from their relative configuration.


+These methods are particularly
interesting because they can directly exploit properties that
are known to influence human head pose estimation.

These geometric methods are fast and simple. With only
a few facial features, a decent estimate of head pose can be
obtained. The obvious difficulty lies in detecting the
features with high precision and accuracy, but the more
subtle challenges stem from handling outlying or missing
feature detections.

Also, situations often arise that can permanently obscure
facial landmarks, such as when a person wears glasses and
obscures his eye corners. Considering that geometric
approaches depend on the accurate detection of facial
points, they are typically more sensitive to occlusion than
appearance-based methods that use information from the
entire facial region.


It is worth noting that even very simple geometric cues
can be used to estimate head pose. Fitting an ellipse to the
gradient contour and color of a face provides a coarse
estimate of pose for one DOF [20]. For near-frontal faces, the
yaw of a face can be reliably estimated by creating a triangle
between the eyes and the mouth and finding its deviation
from a pure isosceles triangle [90].





Tracking methods recover the global pose change of
the head from the observed movement between
video frames.
-irrelevant















Hybrid methods combine one or more of these
aforementioned methods to overcome the limita-
tions inherent in any single approach.



